This guidance suggests mitigations to improve your organisation's resilience against phishing attacks, whilst minimising disruption to user productivity. The defences suggested in this guidance are also useful against other types of cyber attack, and will help your organisation become more resilient overall.

This guidance is aimed at technology, operations or security staff responsible for designing and implementing defences for medium to large organisations. This includes staff responsible for phishing training.

Phishing is when attackers send scam emails (or text messages) that contain links to malicious websites. The websites may contain malware (such as ransomware) which can sabotage systems and organisations. Or they might be designed to trick users into revealing sensitive information (such as passwords), or transferring money.

Phishing emails can hit an organisation of any size and type. You might get caught up in a mass campaign (where emails are sent indiscriminately to millions of inboxes), or it could be the first step in a targeted attack against your company, or a specific employee. In these targeted campaigns, the attacker uses information about your employees or company to make their messages even more persuasive and realistic. This is usually referred to as spear phishing.

The mitigations described in this guidance are mostly focused on preventing the impact of phishing attacks within your organisation, but if you implement these measures, you will be helping to protect the whole of the UK. Setting up DMARC, for example, stops phishers from spoofing your domain (that is, making their emails look like they come from your organisation).

Phishing mitigations often place too much emphasis on users being able to spot phishing emails. As we explain below, this approach risks wasting both time and money without improving security. Instead, you should widen your defences to include technical measures, with user education being just one aspect of your approach. A layered approach means you'll have multiple opportunities to detect a phishing attack, and then stop it before it causes harm. Some phishing attacks will always get through, so you should plan for incidents which means you can minimise the damage they cause.

The mitigations below require a combination of technological, process, and people-based approaches. They all must be considered for your defences to be really effective. More specifically, the guidance splits the mitigations into four layers on which you can build your defences: make it difficult for attackers to reach your users; help users identify and report suspected phishing messages; protect your organisation from the effects of undetected phishing emails; respond quickly to incidents.

No training package, including phishing simulations, can teach users to spot every phishing attempt. Asking users to examine, in depth, every email they receive will not leave enough hours in the day for work tasks. It's an unrealistic and counter-productive goal because responding to emails and clicking links is an integral part of work.

Phishing simulations can also create legal risk. Since no one can be expected to spot all phishing emails, punishing people for clicking on emails you've sent starts to resemble entrapment. For this reason, you should always check with your HR department before undertaking any phishing simulations.

More practically, blaming users for clicking on links doesn't work. People click for a range of reasons. These could be personality traits or situational (for example, if a person is busy and stressed). Threatening someone with punishment doesn't change these factors.

Phishing simulations also erode trust between employees and security. Employees who are afraid for their jobs will not report mistakes. Employees should instead create a positive cyber security culture so employees feel comfortable reporting phishing incidents, and in this sense, they can be a valuable early warning system.

So why are phishing simulations so popular? One reason is that they allegedly provide clear, quantitative metrics that demonstrate how progress (in an area you care about) is being made. However, metrics express an organisation's values, and if you appear to value the absence of reports of problems, you incentivise people to keep quiet about issues. You should consider how you can formulate your security metrics to also include successes. For example, as well as measuring how many people clicked on a phishing email, focus on how many people reported it.

The following real-world example illustrates how a company in the financial sector used effective layered mitigations to defend against phishing attacks. Reliance on any single layer would have missed some of the attacks, and resulted in a costly and time consuming clean-up operation.

The company, which has around 4,000 employees, received 1,800 emails containing a number of variants of Dridex malware. The email claimed to be an invoice that needed urgent attention, which was relevant to the role of some of the recipients. It was not targeted at individual users with any personal information, but was well written, with good spelling and grammar.

1,800 emails were sent to the organisation by this campaign. 1,750 were stopped by an email filtering service that identified that malware was present. This left 50 emails that reached user inboxes. Of these, 36 were either ignored by users, or reported using a button in their email client. 25 were reported in total, including some post click; this was the first indication that the attack had got through the initial layer of defences. This left 14 emails that were clicked-on, which launched the malware. 13 instances of the malware failed to launch as intended due to devices being up-to-date. 1 instance of malware was installed. The malware's call home to its operator was detected, reported and blocked. 1 device was seized, investigated and cleaned in a few hours.
